\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@input texiplus
@c %**start of header

@c oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo
@c                                                                            o
@c                           GPRMAKE DOCUMENTATION                            o
@c                                                                            o
@c                  G P R M A K E   U S E R ' S   G U I D E                   o
@c                                                                            o
@c                     Copyright (C) 2007, AdaCore                            o
@c                                                                            o
@c oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo

@setfilename gprmake_ug.info
@settitle GPRMAKE User's Guide
@setchapternewpage odd
@syncodeindex fn cp

@titlepage

@title GPRMAKE User's Guide
@c @subtitle Date: $Date: 2006/09/11 04:02:07 $
@author AdaCore

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

Printed March 2007 @*
Copyright @copyright{} 2007, AdaCore

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top GPRMAKE User's Guide

@noindent
@c GPRMAKE User's Guide@*
@c Document revision level $Revision: 1.0 $@*
@*
@noindent
AdaCore@*

@menu
* Introduction::
* Basic Concepts::
* Guided Tour::
* Building with gprmake::
* Cleaning up with gprclean::
* Configuring with gprconfig::
* Configuration files Description::
* Other companion tools::
* Index::

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Contents ---@*

Introduction

Basic Concepts

Guided Tour
* First Steps::
* Subsystems::
* Libraries::

Building with gprmake
* Command Line::
* Switches::

Cleaning up with gprclean

Configuring with gprconfig
* Using gprconfig::
* Description of the knowledge base::
* General file format::
* Compiler description::
* Configurations::

Configuration files Description

Other companion tools

Index
@end detailmenu
@end menu
@end ifinfo

@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Introduction
@unnumbered Introduction
@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

gprmake is a generic software build tool designed for the construction of
big multi-language systems organized into subsystems and libraries.
It is well-suited for compiled languages offering separate compilation units
such as Ada, C, C++ or Fortran.

gprmake manages a 3 step build process
@itemize @bullet
@item compilation phase
each compilation unit of each subsystem is examined in turn, checked for
consitency and compiled or recommpiled when necessary by the appropriate
compiler.  The recompilation decision is based on dependency information
usually produced by a former compilation.
@item post-compilation phase (or binding)
Compiled units of a given language are passed to a language specific
post-compilation tool when it is exist. This is also during this phase
that objects are grouped into static or dynamic libraries as specified.
@item linking phase
All units or libraries from all subsystems are passed to a linker tool
specific to the set of toolchains used together.
@end itemize

gprmake is a generic tool in the sense that it allows easy configuration of
@itemize
@item language characteristics (e.g. source naming conventions)
@item toolchain characteristics (e.g. compiler invocation)
@item subsystem characteristics (e.g. compiler default options)
@item source file characteristics (e.g. file specific compilation options)
@end itemize

@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Concepts
@chapter Basic Concepts
@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c describe here basic concepts such as
@c  - subsystem
@c  - project file
@c  - project subpackages
@c  - project attribute
@c  - source files, object files, switches
@c and any other technical terms that are used later
@c  also mention where to find the project file syntax & semantics

@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Guided Tour
@chapter Guide Tour
@c  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* First Steps::
* Subsystems::
* Libraries::
@end menu

@node First Steps
@section First Steps
@c show a hello world construction with Ada & C

@node Subsystems
@section Subsystems
@c describe a bigger project with several source dirs and object dirs

@node Libraries
@section Libraries
@c augment the previous example with putting one of the
@c subsystem in a library
@c show how to deal with externa libraries

@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Building with gprmake
@chapter Building with gprmake
@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* Command Line::
* Switches::
@end menu

@node Command Line
@section Command Line
@c explain this part
@c Usage: gprmake -P<project file> [opts]  [name]
@c    {[-cargs opts] [- cargs:lang pts] [-largs opts][-gargs opts]}

@node Switches
@section Switches
@c  --config_path=<path>
@c           Specify the config path
@c  --config_project=<project name>
@c           Specify the main config project file name
@c  -b       Bind only
@c  -c       Compile only
@c  -C       Cache source mappings: use mapping files
@c  -d       Display progress
@c   -eL     Follow symbolic links when processing project files
@c  -f       Force recompilations
@c  -F       Full project path name in brief error messages
@c  -jnum    Use num processes to compile
@c  -k       Keep going after compilation errors
@c  -l       Link only
@c  -o name  Choose an alternate executable name
@c  -p       Create missing obj, lib and exec dirs
@c  -P proj  Use Project File proj
@c  -q       Be quiet/terse
@c  -s       Recompile if compiler switches have changed
@c  -u       Unique compilation. Only compile the given files
@c  -U       Unique compilation for all sources of all projects
@c  -v       Verbose output
@c  -vPx     Specify verbosity when parsing Project Files
@c  -we      Treat all warnings as errors
@c  -wn      Treat warnings as warnings
@c  -ws      Suppress all warnings
@c  -Xnm=val Specify an external reference for Project Files

@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Cleaning up with gprclean
@chapter Cleaning up with gprclean
@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Configuring with gprconfig
@chapter Configuring with gprconfig
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* Using gprconfig::
* Description of the knowledge base::
* General file format::
* Compiler description::
* Configurations::
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Using gprconfig
@section Using gprconfig
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@noindent
When you launch gprconfig, it will first search for all compilers it can find on
your @code{PATH}. It is recommended, although not mandatory, that you put the
compilers that you expect to use for your application in your @code{PATH} before
you launch @code{gprconfig}, since that simplifies the setup.

@code{gprconfig} will then display a list of all the compilers it has found,
along with the language they can compile, the runtime they use (when
applicable),@dots{}. It will then wait until you select one of the compilers.
This list is sorted by language, then by order in the @code{PATH} environment
variable (so that compilers that you are more likely to use appear first),
then by runtime names and finally by version of the compiler.
The idea is that the first compiler for any language is the most likely one
you want to use.

Selection is done by entering the letter that appears on the line for
each compiler. If the compiler was already selected, it is deselected.

The list of compilers is then displayed again, but some filtering has been
performed: only compilers that target the same platform as the selected
compiler are now displayed. @code{gprconfig} then checks whether it is
possible to link sources compiled with the selected compiler and each of
the remaing compiler; when linking is not possible, the compiler is not
displayed. Likewise, all compilers for the same language are hidden, so that
you can only select one compiler per language. If you need to compile your
application with several C compilers for instance, you should create another
language, for instance called C2, for that purpose. That will give you the
flexibility to indicate in the project files which compiler should be used
for which sources.

The goal of this filtering is to make it more obvious whether you have
good chances of being able to link. There is however no guarantee that
@code{gprconfig} will know for sure how to link any combination of the
remaining compilers.

In the list, if you select "o", @code{gprconfig} will let you enter
information about a compiler that was not found automatically:
@itemize @bullet
@item Name

In the knowledge base of @code{gprconfig}, each compiler is associated
with a simple name. All the known names are listed next to the question.
If your compiler is one of the known ones, enter the name. You can also
enter any other name, but then @code{gprconfig} will not be able to
guess any of the remaining info.

@item Path

This is the directory that contains the executable of your compiler, not
including the name of the compiler itself. For instance, for a GNAT
compiler installed in @file{/usr/local/gnat/bin/gnatmake}, the path would be
@file{/usr/local/gnat/bin}.

@item Version

The version of your compiler. If the Name you provided is one of the known
compilers, @code{gprconfig} will try to guess it for you, so that you can
simply press enter if the guess is valid.

@item Language

The language that you intend to use the compiler for. If you use the same
compiler for multiple languages, you should enter only one of these at
this point, and later on create a new compiler entry for the other
languages. As for Version, @code{gprconfig} will try to guess it for you
if it is one of the known compilers.

@item Runtime

The runtime you intend to use for this compiler. For most languages, this
is not applicable, and you should simply press Enter. Once again,
@code{gprconfig} will try to guess it if possible.

@item Target

The target architecture for which the compiler is compiling. @code{gprconfig}
will try to guess it either from the compiler you pointed to, or will by
default use the current system's architecture, assuming this is not a
cross compiler.
@end itemize

You can select as many compilers as are used in your application. Once you
are done selecting the compilers, select "s", and @code{gprmake} will
generate the configuration file.

@subsection Command line switches

The following command line switches are supported by @code{gprconfig}.

@itemize @bullet
@item -o file

The name of the output file. By default, @code{gprconfig} will search for
@code{gprmake} on your PATH, and create a default configuration file for
it. But you can alternatively choose to create a different configuration
file and then use @code{gprmake}'s command line switches to choose among
these.

@item -db directory

Indicates another directory that should be parsed for gprconfig's knowledge
base. Most of the time this is only useful if you are creating your own
XML description files.

@item -db -

Prevents @code{gprconfig} from reading its default knowledge base. You should
point to another directory with @code{-db directory}, or gprconfig will not be
able to generate any configuration file.

@item -config name,path[,version[,language[,target[,runtime]]]]

This parameter is used to preselect configurations.
"name" should be one of the known compiler names (e.g. "GNAT", "GCC",...), the
full list of which is visible when gprconfig is used interactively and you add
a custom compiler. However, you can use an unknown name, but in this case you
need to provide all the information yourself.

"path" is the directory that contains the compiler executable, for instance
@file{/usr/bin} (and not the installation prefix @file{/bin}).

If "name" is a known compiler name, the remaining attributes will have defaults
computed automatically by @code{gprconfig}. You can either specify them, or
use an empty string to get the default value and specify a later parameter.

@smallexample
  gprconfig -config GNAT,/usr/bin       # automatic parameters
  gprconfig -config GCC,/usr/bin,,C     # automatic version
@end smallexample

@item -l[lang1,lang2,..]

This switch is use to automatically select the first compiler for each
language specified in the list. When no language is specified, the default
is to select "ada,c,c++". There can be no space between -l and the list of
languages.

@item -batch

If this parameter is specified, @code{gprconfig} doesn't go into its
interactive compiler selection, but generates the output configuration file
directly from the compilers selected with the @code{-config} command line
switch.

@end itemize

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Description of the knowledge base
@section Description of the knowledge base
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------


@noindent
@code{gprconfig} itself has no hard-coded knowledge of compilers. This way,
no new version of gprconfig needs to be recompiled whenever a new compiler
is distributed.

All its knowledge is embedded in a set of XML files, call the knowledge
base. Users can easily contribute to this general knowledge base, and have
@code{gprconfig} immediately take advantage of this.

The knowledge base contains various kind of information:
@itemize @bullet
@item Compiler description

   When it is run interactively, @code{gprconfig} will search on the user's
   @code{PATH} for known compilers, and try to automatically guess their
   configuration (version, supported languages, supported targets, runtimes,
   @dots{}).

   This step is optional, since a user can also enter all the information
   manually. However, it is recommended that the knowledge base explicitly
   lists its known compilers to make configuration easier for end users.

@item Specific compilation switches

   When a compiler is used, depending on its version, target, runtime,@dots{},
   some specific command line switches might have to be enforced. The
   knowledge base is a good place to store such information once and for all.

   For instance, with the GNAT compiler, using the soft-float runtime should
   force @code{gprmake} to use the @code{-msoft-float} compilation switch.

@item Linker options

   Linking a multi-language application is often tricky, and requires specific
   linker switches. These switches depend on the list of languages, the list
   of compilers,@dots{}.

@item Unsupported compiler mix

   It is sometimes not possible to link together code compiled with two
   compilers. The knowledge base should store this information, so that end
   users do not waste time trying to use that compiler combination.

@end itemize

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node General file format
@section General file format
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@noindent
The knowledge base is implemented as a set of XML files. None of these
files have a special name, nor a special role. Instead, the user can
freely create new files, and put them in the knowledge base directory,
to contribute new knowledge.

The location of the knowledge base is @file{$prefix/share/gprconfig},
where @file{$prefix} is the directory in which @code{gprconfig} was
installed. Any file with extension @file{.xml} in this directory will
be parsed automatically by gprconfig at startup.

All files must have the following format:

@smallexample
<?xml version="1.0">
<gprconfig>
   ...
</gprconfig>
@end smallexample

The XML parser used by @code{gprconfig} is very simple minded, and does not
support advanced XML constructs. In fact, it also has a few limitation
with regards to comments (for instance they cannot contain the '>'
character).

The root tag must be @code{<gprconfig>}.

The remaining sections in this chapter will list the valid XML tags that
can be used to replace the '...' code above. These tags can either all be
put in a single XML files, or split in several files.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Compiler description
@section Compiler description
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@noindent
One of the XML tags that can be put as a child of @code{<gprconfig>} is
@code{<compiler_description>}. This node and its children describe one of
the compilers known to @code{gprconfig}. The tool uses them when it
initially looks for all compilers known on the user's @code{PATH}
environment variable.

This is optional information, but simplifies the use of @code{gprconfig}.

This node doesn't accept any XML attribute. However, it accepts a number
of child tags that explain how to query the various attributes of the
compiler.

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{<name>}

This tag contains a simple string, which is the name of the compiler.
This name must be unique in all the configuration files, and is used to
identify that compiler_description node.

@smallexample
<compiler_description>
   <name>GNAT</name>
</compiler_description>
@end smallexample

@item @code{<executable>}

This tag contains a simple string, which is the name of an executable
to search for on the PATH. Examples are @file{"gnatls"}, @file{"gcc}",
@dots{}

@code{gprconfig} searches in all directories listed on the PATH for such
an executable. When one is found, the rest of the @code{<compiler_description>}
children is checked to know whether the compiler is valid. The directory
in which the executable was found becomes the "current directory" for
the remaining XML children.

@item @code{<version>}

This tag contains any of the nodes defined in "external values" below.
It shows how to query the version number of the compiler. If the version
cannot be found, the executable will not be listed in the list of compilers.
The value returned by the system will be split into words. As a result, if
the returned value is "ada,c,c++", there are three languages supported by the
compiler. The words can be comma-separated or space-separated.

If you use have several child nodes, the first one will be used to set the
special @code{$VERSION} substitution string (see External Values below), and
the second will be used to defined the special @code{$VERSION2} substitution
string.

@item @code{<languages>}

This node indicates how to query the list of languages. See "External values"
below for valid children of this node. The returned value is a comma-separated
or space-separated list of languages.

@item @code{<runtimes>}

This node indicates how to query the list of supported runtimes for the
compiler. See "External values" below for valid children. The returned value
is split into words as for @code{<languages>}.

@item @code{<target>}

This node indicates how to query the target architecture for the compiler.
See "External values" below for valid children.

@item @code{<extra_tool>}

This node contains the name of an extra tool to run if the compiler is
selected by the user. Typically, it can be used to generate a user-visible
project file for the user, like @file{ada_runtime.gpr}. This attribute is
the full command line used to launch the tool, where special substrings like
"$OUTPUT_DIR",... will be automatically substituted (see External Values
below for the full list of such special substrings)

@end itemize

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection External values
@c --------------------------------------------------------------------
@noindent
A number of the XML nodes described above can contain one or more children,
and explain how to query a value from the executable. Here is the list of
valid contents for these nodes. The @code{<directory>} and @code{<external>}
children can be repeated multiple times, and the @code{<filter>} and
@code{<must_match>} nodes will be applied to each of these. The final
value of the external value is the sum of the computation for each of the
@code{<directory>} and @code{<external>} nodes.

@itemize @bullet
@item A simple string

When a simple string is given in the node, this indicates a constant. For
instance, the list of supported languages might be defined as:

@smallexample
<compiler_description>
   <name>GNAT</name>
   <executable>gnatls</executable>
   <languages>Ada</languages>
</compiler_description>
@end smallexample

for the GNAT compiler, since this is an Ada only compiler anyway.

@item @code{<external match="regexp" group="0">command</external>}

If the contents of the node is an @code{<external>} child, this indicates
that a command should be run on the system, and its output parsed.
When the command is run, the current directory (ie the one that contains
the executable found through the @code{<executable>} node, is put first
on the PATH. The output of the command is matched again the regular
expression @code{regexp}. Finally, the parenthesis group specified by
@code{group} is returned. By default, group is 0, which indicates the
whole output of the command.

For instance, extracting the version number from @code{gcc} can be done
with:

@smallexample
<version>
   <external regexp="^gcc version (\S+)" group="1">gcc -v</external>
</version>
@end smallexample

Since the PATH has been modified, we know that the @code{gcc} command that
is executed is the one from the same directory as the @code{<external>}
node.

@item @code{<directory group="0">regexp</directory>}

If the contents of the node is a @code{<directory}> child, this
indicates that @code{gprconfig} should find all the files matching the
regular expression. Regexp is a path relative to the directory that contains
the @code{<executable>} file, and should use unix directory separators
(ie '/'), since the actual directory will be converted into this format
before the match, for system independence of the knowledge base. Special
constructs can be specified in the regexp:

@itemize -
@item "$@{HOST@}"  is replaced by the architecture of the host on which
      gprconfig is running. This name is hard-coded in gprconfig itself,
      and is generated by @code{configure} when gprconfig was build.
@item "$@{TARGET@}" is replaced by the target architecture of the compiler,
      as returned by the @code{<target>} node. This is of course not available
      when computing the target itself
@item "$@{VERSION@}" is replaced by the version of the compiler. This is not
      available when computing the target or, of course, the version itself.
@item "$@{VERSION2@}" is replaced by the second version of the compiler. Some
      compilers depend on other tools (like GNAT depends on gcc), and this
      version might for instance contain the version number for these other
      tools. The exact semantic, though, depends on the @code{<version>} node.
@item "$@{PATH@}" is the current directory, ie the one containing the executable
      found through @code{<executable>}. It always ends with a directory
      separator.
@item "$@{GPRCONFIG_PREFIX@}" is the directory in which gprconfig
      was installed (e.g @file{"/usr/local/"} if the executable is
      @file{"/usr/local/bin/gprconfig"}. This directory always ends with a
      directory separator.
@item "$@{RUNTIME@}", "$@{RUNTIME_DIR@}", "$@{LANGUAGE@}", "$@{OUTPUT_DIR@}"
      This string will always be substituted by the empty string when the
      value of the external value is computed. These are special strings
      used when substituting text in configuration chunks.
      OUTPUT_DIR and RUNTIME_DIR always end with a directory separator.
@item "regexp" can be any valid regular expression. This will only match
      a directory name, not a subdirectory. Remember to quote special
      characters, including ".", if you do not mean to use a regexp.
@end itemize

The group attribute indicates which parenthesis group should be returned.
It defaults to 0 which indicates the whole matched path. If this attribute is
not an integer, but a string, then it is the value returned.

For instance, finding the list of supported runtimes for the GNAT compiler
is done with:

@smallexample
<runtimes>
 <directory group="1">\.\./lib/gcc/$@{TARGET@}/.*/rts-(.*)/adainclude</directory>
 <directory group="default">\.\./lib/gcc/$@{TARGET@}/.*/adainclude</directory>
</runtimes>
@end smallexample

Note the second node, which matches the default runtime, and displays it as
such.

@item @code{<filter>value1,value2,...</filter>}

This node must come after one the previously described ones. It is used to
further filter the output. The previous output is split into words (it is
considered as a comma-separated or space-separated list of words), and only
those words in "value1", "value2",... is kept.

For instance, the @code{gcc} compiler will return a lot of supported
languages, including "ada". If we do not want to use it as an Ada
compiler, so we can put:

@smallexample
<languages>
   <external regexp="languages=(\S+)" group="1">gcc -v</external>
   <filter>c,c++,fortran</filter>
</languages>
@end smallexample

@item @code{<must_match>regexp</must_match>}

If this node is present, then the filtered output is compared with the
specified regular expression. If no match is found, then the executable
is not stored in the list of known compilers.

For instance, if one wants to have a @code{<compiler_description>} tag
specific to an older version of GCC, we could write:

@smallexample
<version>
   <external regexp="gcc version (\S+)" group="1">gcc -v </external>
   <must_match>2.8.1</must_match>
</version>
@end smallexample

Other versions of gcc will not match this @code{<compiler_description>}
node.

@end itemize

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Configurations
@section Configurations
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@noindent
The second type of information stored in the knowledge base are the chunks
of @code{gprmake} configuration files.

Each of these chunks is also put in an XML node, that provides optional
filters. If all the filter match, then the chunk will be merged with other
similar chunks and put in the final configuration file that is generated
by @code{gprconfig}.

For instance, it is possible to indicate that a chunk should only be
included if the GNAT compiler with the soft-float runtime is used. Such
a chunk can for instance be used to ensure that Ada sources are always
compiled with the @code{-msoft-float} command line switch.

@code{gprconfig} doesn't do intelligent merging of chunks. All it does
is group packages together. For instance, if the two chunks are:

@smallexample
chunk1:
   package Language_Processing is
     for Attr1 use ("foo");
   end Language_Processing;
chunk2:
   package Language_Processing is
     for Attr1 use ("bar");
   end Language_Processing;
@end smallexample

Then the final configuration file will look like:

@smallexample
   package Language_Processing is
      for Attr1 use ("foo");
      for Attr1 use ("bar");
   end Language_Processing;
@end smallexample

As a result, to avoid conflicts, it is recommended that the chunks be
written so that they they easily collaborate together. For instance, if we
want to obtain something equivalent to
@smallexample
   package Language_Processing is
      for Attr1 use ("foo", "bar");
   end Language_Processing;
@end smallexample
the two chunks above should be written as:
@smallexample
chunk1:
   package Language_Processing is
      for Attr1 use Language_Processing'Attr1 & ("foo");
   end Language_Processing;
chunk2:
   package Language_Processing is
      for Attr1 use Language_Processing'Attr1 & ("bar");
   end Language_Processing;
@end smallexample

The chunks are described in an @code{<configuration>} XML node. The most
important child of such a node is @code{<config>}, which contains the
chunk itself. For instance, one would write:

@smallexample
<configuration>
  ...  list of filters, see below
  <config>
   package Language_Processing is
      for Attr1 use Language_Processing'Attr1 & ("foo");
   end Language_Processing;
  </config>
</configuration>
@end smallexample

If @code{<config>} is an empty node (ie "<config/>" or "<config></config>")
was used, then the combination of selected compilers will be reported as
invalid, in the sense that we know that code compiled with these compilers
cannot be linked together. As a result, @code{gprconfig} will not create
the configuration file.

When the @code{<configuration>} node has a single @code{<compilers>}
child, special substrings are substituted in the chunk. These are the same as
described for External Values in a previous section, ie "$RUNTIME",
"$PATH", "$RUNTIME_DIR", "$OUTPUT_DIR", "$VERSION", "$LANGUAGE", "$HOST"
and "$TARGET". Their
values are those of the first compiler in @code{<compilers>} that matched.
"$OUTPUT_DIR" is the directory in which the generated configuration file will
be created.

The filters themselves are of course defined through XML tags, and can
be any of:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{<compilers negate="false">}

This filter contains a list of @code{<compiler>} children. The
@code{<compilers>} filter matches if any of its children match.
However, you can have several @code{<compilers>} filters, in which
case they must all match. This can be used to include linker switches
chunks. For instance, the following code would be used to describe
the linker switches to use when GNAT 5.05 or 5.04 is used in addition to
g++ 3.4.1:

@smallexample
<configuration>
  <compilers>
    <compiler name="GNAT" version="5.04" />
    <compiler name="GNAT" version="5.05" />
  </compilers>
  <compilers>
    <compiler name="G++" version="3.4.1" />
  </compilers>
  ...
</configuration>
@end smallexample

If the attribute "negate" is "true", then the meaning of this filter is
inverted, and it will match if none of its children matches.

The format of the @code{<compiler>} is the following:
@smallexample
   <compiler name="name" version="..." runtime="..." language="..." />
@end smallexample

The name attribute must be specified, and will match one of the @code{<name>}
attribute used in the @code{<compiler_description>} children.
All other attributes are regular expressions, that are matched against
the corresponding selected compilers. When an attribute is not specified,
it will always match. Matching is done in a case-insensitive manner.
For instance, to check a GNAT compiler in the 5.x family, use:

@smallexample
   <compiler name="GNAT" version="5.\d+" />
@end smallexample

@item @code{<hosts negate="false">}

This filter contains a list of @code{<host>} children. It matches when
any of its children matches. You can specificy only one @code{<hosts>}
node.
The format of @code{<host>} is a node with a single mandatory attribute
@code{"name"}, which is a regexp matched against the architecture on
which @code{gprconfig} is running. The name of the architecture was
computed by @code{configure} when @code{gprconfig} was build.

If the "negate" attribute is "true", then the meaning of this filter is
inverted, and it will match when none of its children matches.

For instance, to active a chunk only if the compiler is running on an
intel linux machine, use:

@smallexample
   <hosts>
      <host name="i.86-.*-linux(-gnu)?" />
   </hosts>
@end smallexample

@item @code{<targets negate="false">}

This filter contains a list of @code{<target>} children. It behaves
exactly like @code{<hosts>}, but matches against the architecture
targeted by the selected compilers. For instance, to activate a chunk
only when the code is targeted for linux, use:

If the "negate" attribute is "true", then the meaning of this filter is
inverted, and it will match when none of its children matches.

@smallexample
   <targets>
      <target name="i.86-.*-linux(-gnu)?" />
   </targets>
@end smallexample
@end itemize

@c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Configuration files Description
@chapter Configuration files Description
c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c describe here the format of the gprmake configuration files

c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Other companion tools
@chapter Other companion tools
c  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@c describe here gprbind, gprlib & create_ada_runtime

Index


@c  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Index
@c  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

@unnumbered Index

@c @printindex cp

@contents

@bye

